---
title:      "Visual Studio Code and CMake (and Other Tools)"
tags:       development-environment vscode cmake clang static-analysis
---

Visual Studio Code and C/C++ project development? Let's see how they
work together.

# Separation of Paths

When started with C/C++ software development, I didn't give much thought
on the integration of components that make an IDE. Basically, what I did
is to fire it up, create a project which automagically set up build
configurations, altogether with toolchain, sources and includes
configuration, and then - code away! Code assistance operations like
disabling inactive code lines, code completion, jump to definition
worked out of the box, as well as highlighting of syntax and compile
errors.

This mode of operation translated seamlessly to the MCU embedded
development, with every vendor providing a complete tool ecosystem for
creating a firmware to be executed on their hardware platform portfolio.
But, on the other hand, Linux application development diverged in the
other area, one with clear demarcation between the code editor, and the
build system. There, former was seen as independent from the latter, and
furthermore, oblivious to the configuration provided by it. And, even
with the editor providing facilities as aforementioned code assistance
and highlighting, it was often a manual process to keep its perception
of software project configuration in line with the build system's one.
This led to being wary of these "assistance" tools as they could provide
a false image on the project code, and went as far as ditching them
altogether and demoting the code editor to a intelligent text editor at
best, dumb notepad at worst.

# Enter VSCode

There were previous interests for regaining this connection between a
development environment and a code editor, but with short longevity.
This state of affairs went on as I got introduced to a
[VSCode](https://code.visualstudio.com/). Ditching it first as a coding
hipsters kind of a tool, especially seeing it in light of web
development where it first took ahold, I was reluctant to try it out,
sticking rather to a proven Vim text editing environment. But, gradually
I transitioned to it, mostly driven by a liking of its workspace
management and a suitable enough Vim extension. With time it became my
main file projects management tool, providing almost all-in-one
environment for needed operations.

So, with that in mind I've revisited the old topic of bridging a gap
between a code editor and a the build system. The question was, can
Visual Studio Code be connected with a C/C++ set up console-driven build
system, and assist in the code development while relying on the project
configuration specified there? And, initial result seem to yield a
positive answer.

# Setting The Stage

First question was, what would be the assumed build system to attach to?
[CMake](https://cmake.org/) here came out as a first candidate, as it is
a project configure/build/test/package toolkit popular enough, and with
which I had most previous experience. Plain Makefiles are also a good
option, but more suitable for simpler task specification, other toolkits
I haven't considered.

Second question was, what would be the expectations from the
integration? From the top of the head first would be code assistance
aligned with selected build configuration, that is with selected source
files to be built, included includes and libraries, and project defines.
Next in line would be interface for running build system tasks, then
configuration of the debugger so that a debug session can be ran from
VSCode. As a last addition, integration with code writing assistance
tools, namely a formatter and a static analysis would be great, with
latter again aligned to the current build configuration.

For formatting and static analysis choice fell on the Clang toolkit,
[ClangFormat](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html) and
[Clang-Tidy](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/), mostly because
they're good free tools, with configuration specifiable in config files,
and with good preexisting integration to VSCode and CMake.

# Add Extensions to The Mix

Basically, to get things running all I needed were two extensions for
VSCode -
[`ms-vscode.cpptools`](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools)
for code assistance and formatting, and
[`ms-vscode.cmake-tools`](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cmake-tools)
for CMake integration. With them, and with other prerequisite packages
installed in the evaluation VM, I was set to go.

# Initial Impressions

In short, positive. Integration works fine, code assistance works for
the opened projects, even if CMake contains subprojects with same-named
symbols. Debugging, too, avoiding non-compiled code.

For the additional tools, VSCode invokes formatting per given
configuration, while static analysis is enabled through CMake and ran
before the compilation unit build. What made me smile is that the
reported analysis findings are shown in the code editor window
altogether with squiggly lines.

# What Next?

Well, even with good initial findings there's still some of that nagging
feeling about disjuncture between the build system and code editor.
Additional test projects and the use of this integration on the actual
projects seems like a sure way to address it.

If you want to check it out, current VSCode workspace with test projects
I have hosted on GitHub - [here's a repo
link](https://github.com/kibihrchak/hello-vscode-cmake).
