---
title:      "Autonomous Driving Observations"
tags:       ai autonomous driving
---

"Tap on the stars to rate your autonomous ride - ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐"

## Driving Instructor to an Autonomous Driving System

While watching the Tesla FSD videos from [AI
DRIVR](https://www.youtube.com/c/AIDRIVR), one thing about autonomous
driving caught my attention. My previous perception about autonomous
driving and [its
categorization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-driving_car#Levels_of_driving_automation)
was that -

1.  Either car has full control over the driving and requires drivers
    assistance when it cannot determine the correct course of action, or
2.  That car automates only certain aspect of driving (eg. cruise
    control), and leaves the rest to the human driver.

But one additional aspect that appeared really significant to me there
was having the ability to act like a driving instructor to the
autonomous driving system. This occured on several of the Tesla FSD
videos, where the human driver didn't take control over the car from the
autonomous driving system, but rather gave it a hint what it could do.
Some examples seen there were - giving it a nudge when being stopped at
the intersection that it is safe to advance, or requesting the lane
change when the car seems unsure about doing it. Other things that come
to my mind and follow this suit would be keeping the steering wheel
while turning and thus saying to the car that it is turning too sharply,
or tapping the brake to tell the car to slow down, or tapping the
accelerator to tell the car that it is okay to take over another
vehicle.

This whole "driving instructor" functionality to me seems like a really
good approach to bridge the gap while developing an autonomous system of
level 2 and above. The important thing is that the system still has the
ability to get the vehicle to a safe state if it is unable to perform
anymore, but the instructor thing allows for a partially done system to
still be usable. Then, with time as the system improves, driver's
assistance would be required less and less. And, about the improvement,
this assistance aspect has a real value if the driving system behavior
is monitored and that data aggregated to improve the system.

## "It is Human to Make Mistakes"

Another noticeable thing while watching the videos, and something that
AI DRIVR has also mentioned on a couple of occassions is the ability of
the autonomous driving system to gracefully deal with mistakes. It is
one thing to detect that you in a mess and just freeze there and yepl
for hooman's assistance, and other thing is to try to make things
better. Some examples of that would be -

-   Trying to move to the side of the road if there's not enough room
    for the vehicle from the opposite direction to pass.
-   Trying to claw your way through an intersection after selecting the
    wrong turn lane.

These examples ride on the fact that other human drivers will be aware
of your mistake and that they will react to it, and not behave like
autonomous drones with preprogrammed paths. They give you some leeway
for it and not a middle finger, and even move aside themselves, or they
will react but will yield anyways like for the second example.
