---
title:      "Git Guide"
tags:       git
---

Some tips and tricks on Git collected here and there.

# Table of Contents

1.  TOC
{:toc}

# Credentials Management

The question addressed here is - What I need to do to get my credentials
stored in a safe way, and avoid getting prodded for them every time I
access a remote like GitHub. And, switching to SSH key pair
authentication is either inconvenient or not possible.

The procedure is this:

1.  Set up low-risk credentials - This is not Git-specific topic, but
    useful nevertheless. The idea is to use access tokens instead of an
    account password when accessing the site repo (GitHub, TFS). These
    tokens may have limited permitted operations scope, thus lowering
    damage done by them being exposed. Process here is:
    1.  Find a way to generate a token on the used remote - Eg. for
        GitHub that can be done over
        <https://github.com/settings/tokens>.
    2.  Use generated token instead of the account password when
        accessing that site repos.
2.  See what credential helpers are available for Git installation -
    ```
    $ git help -a | grep credential-
    ```

    Some common options here are:

    |Helper     |Description
    |---        |---
    |`cache`    |In-memory temporary storage
    |`store`    |Plaintext file (usually `~/.git-credentials`)
    |`manager`  |Windows Credential Store
    |`wincred`  |Deprecated in favor of `manager`

3.  Set the credential helper -
    ```
    $ git config --global credential.helper <helper>
    ```

More info on this topic -

*   [Credentials configuration manpage](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Credential-Storage)
*   [Pro Git book chapter on credentials](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitcredentials)

# Line Endings Configuration

Ok, this is a common topic but still worth reiterating. Basically, aim
is to get a consistent line endings for text files, both in the
repository and in the working directory. These would be:

1.  All LF in the repo.
2.  On Windows machine, all CRLF except for the files marked as LF (eg.
    Bash scripts).
3.  On Linux machine, all LF except for the files marked as CRLF (eg.
    Visual Studio project file).

Steps to do this are:

1.  Set line ending conversion for commit/checkout:
    1.  (on Windows) Set `core.autocrlf`, so that all checked out text
        files have CRLF newline -
        ```
        $ git config --global core.autocrlf true
        ```
    2.  (on other LF-using platforms) These platforms do not require
        conversion from Git default LF line endings, so:
        1.  See that `core.autocrlf` is unset or `false` as this option
            is intended for Windows use -
            ```
            $ git config --get core.autocrlf
            ```
        2.  In addition, check that `core.eol` is unset or `native` as
            we will be using native line endings -
            ```
            $ git config --get core.eol
            ```
2.  Set repo configuration for files that should keep their line endings
    regardless of the platform (eg. Bash scripts when checked out on
    Windows, or Visual Studio project when checked out on Linux):
    1.  Create `.gitattributes` file in the root directory for files to
        be configured.
    2.  State expected line endings for required paths, eg. `*.sln text
        eol=crlf`.
3.  Renormalize line endings, and commit renormalized endings (if there
    is any) -
    ```
    (repo)$ git add --renormalize .
    (repo)$ git commit -m "Renormalize line endings"
    ```

More info on this topic -

*   [GitHub on line endings](https://help.github.com/en/github/using-git/configuring-git-to-handle-line-endings)
*   [Scott Hanselman on line ending in Git](https://www.hanselman.com/blog/CarriageReturnsAndLineFeedsWillUltimatelyBiteYouSomeGitTips.aspx)
*   [StackOvervflow question on LF/CRLF warnings](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1967370/git-replacing-lf-with-crlf)
